English NameTag Models
=======--=============

%!encoding: utf-8

== English NameTag Models ==[english-conll]

English models are distributed under the
[CC BY-NC-SA http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/] licence.
They are trained on [CoNLL-2003 NER annotations http://www.cnts.ua.ac.be/conll2003/ner/]
of part of [Reuters Corpus http://trec.nist.gov/data/reuters/reuters.html]
and internally use [MorphoDiTa http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/morphodita/]
as a tagger and lemmatizer. English models work in NameTag version 1.0 or later.

English models are versioned according to the date when released, the version
format is ``YYMMDD``, where ``YY``, ``MM`` and ``DD`` are two-digit
representation of year, month and day, respectively. The latest version is
140408.


=== Acknowledgements ===[english-conll_acknowledgements]

This work has been using language resources developed and/or stored and/or
distributed by the LINDAT/CLARIN project of the Ministry of Education of the
Czech Republic (project //LM2010013//).

The recognizer research was supported by the projects
//MSM0021620838// and //LC536// of Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports of the Czech Republic,
//1ET101120503// of Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, LINDAT/CLARIN
project of the Ministry of Education of the Czech Republic (project //LM2010013//),
and partially by SVV project number 267 314.  The research was performed by
Jana Straková, Zdeněk Žabokrtský and Milan Straka.

Czech models use MorphoDiTa as a tagger and lemmatizer, therefore
[MorphoDiTa Acknowledgements http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/morphodita#morphodita_acknowledgements]
and
[English MorphoDiTa Model Acknowledgements http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/morphodita/users-manual#english-morphium-wsj_acknowledgements]
apply.


==== Publications ====

- Straková Jana, Straka Milan, Hajič Jan: //[A New State-of-The-Art Czech Named Entity Recognizer http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/~straka/papers/2013-tsd_ner.pdf].// In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 8082, Text, Speech and Dialogue: 16th International Conference, TSD 2013. Proceedings, Copyright © Springer Verlag, Berlin / Heidelberg, ISBN 978-3-642-40584-6, ISSN 0302-9743, pp. 68-75, 2013

- Straková Jana, Straka Milan and Hajič Jan. //[Open-Source Tools for Morphology, Lemmatization, POS Tagging and Named Entity Recognition. http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P/P14/P14-5003]// In Proceedings of 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: System Demonstrations, pages 13-18, Baltimore, Maryland, June 2014. Association for Computational Linguistics.


=== English Model ===

English model is trained on [CoNLL-2003 NER annotations http://www.cnts.ua.ac.be/conll2003/ner/]
of part of [Reuters Corpus http://trec.nist.gov/data/reuters/reuters.html].
The corpus uses coarse classification using four classes ``PER``, ``ORG``,
``LOC`` and ``MISC``.

: ``english-conll-<version>.ner``
  English named entity recognized trained on CoNLL2003 data.

  The latest version ``english-conll-140408.ner`` reaches 84.73% F1-measure on
  CoNLL2003 etest data. Model speed: ~20k words/s, model size: ~10MB.
