Czech NameTag Models
====================

%!encoding: utf-8

== Czech NameTag Models ==[czech-cnec]

Czech models are distributed under the
[CC BY-NC-SA http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/] licence.
They are trained on [Czech Named Entity Corpus http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/cnec/]
1.1 and 2.0 and internally use [MorphoDiTa http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/morphodita/]
as a tagger and lemmatizer. Czech models work in NameTag version 1.0 or later.

Czech models are versioned according to the date when released, the version
format is ``YYMMDD``, where ``YY``, ``MM`` and ``DD`` are two-digit
representation of year, month and day, respectively. The latest version is
140205.


=== Acknowledgements ===[czech-cnec_acknowledgements]

This work has been using language resources developed and/or stored and/or
distributed by the LINDAT/CLARIN project of the Ministry of Education of the
Czech Republic (project //LM2010013//).

Czech models are trained on Czech Named Entity Corpus, which was created by
Magda Ševčíková, Zdeněk Žabokrtský, Jana Straková and Milan Straka.

The recognizer research was supported by the projects
//MSM0021620838// and //LC536// of Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports of the Czech Republic,
//1ET101120503// of Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, LINDAT/CLARIN
project of the Ministry of Education of the Czech Republic (project //LM2010013//),
and partially by SVV project number 267 314.  The research was performed by
Jana Straková, Zdeněk Žabokrtský and Milan Straka.


==== Publications ====

- Ševčíková Magda, Žabokrtský Zdeněk, Krůza Ondřej: //[Named Entities in Czech: Annotating Data and Developing NE Tagger http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/~zabokrtsky/publications/papers/tsd07-namedent.pdf].// In: Matoušek, V., Mautner, P. (eds.) TSD 2007. LNCS (LNAI), vol. 4629, pp. 188–195. Springer, Heidelberg (2007).

- Kravalová Jana, Žabokrtský Zdeněk: //[Czech Named Entity Corpus and SVM-based Recognizer http://aclweb.org/anthology//W/W09/W09-3538.pdf].// In: Proceedings of the 2009 Named Entities Workshop: Shared Task on Transliteration. NEWS 2009, pp. 194–201. Association for Computational Linguistics (2009).

- Straková Jana, Straka Milan, Hajič Jan: //[A New State-of-The-Art Czech Named Entity Recognizer http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/~straka/papers/2013-tsd_ner.pdf].// In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 8082, Text, Speech and Dialogue: 16th International Conference, TSD 2013. Proceedings, Copyright © Springer Verlag, Berlin / Heidelberg, ISBN 978-3-642-40584-6, ISSN 0302-9743, pp. 68-75, 2013


=== Czech Named Entity Corpus 2.0 Model ===

The model is trained on the training portion of the
[Czech Named Entity Corpus 2.0 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/cnec/cnec2.0].
The corpus uses a
[detailed two-level named entity hierarchy http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/~strakova/cnec2.0/ne-type-hierarchy.pdf],
whose detailed description is available in the documentation of the
[Czech Named Entity Corpus 2.0 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/cnec/cnec2.0].
This hierarchy is an updated version of CNEC
1.1 hierarchy and is more suitable for automatic named entity recognition.

: ``czech-cnec2.0-<version>.ner``
  Czech named entity recognizer trained on training portion of [CNEC 2.0 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/cnec/cnec2.0].

  The latest version ``czech-cnec2.0-140205.ner`` reaches 75.35% F1-measure on
  [CNEC 2.0 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/cnec/cnec2.0] etest data.  Model speed:
  ~40k words/s, model size: ~8MB.

: ``czech-cnec2.0-<version>-no_numbers.ner``
  Czech named entity recognizer trained on training portion of [CNEC 2.0 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/cnec/cnec2.0],
  except for the supertype ``n`` (Number expressions), which is not included.

  The latest version ``czech-cnec2.0-140205-no_numbers.ner`` reaches 77.22%
  F1-measure on [CNEC 2.0 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/cnec/cnec2.0] etest data
  without ``n`` (Number expressions) supertype.  Model speed: ~45k words/s,
  model size: ~8MB.


=== Czech Named Entity Corpus 1.1 Model ===

The model is trained on the training portion of the
[Czech Named Entity Corpus 1.1 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/cnec/cnec1.1].
The corpus uses a
[detailed two-level named entity hierarchy http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/~strakova/cnec1.0/ne-type-hierarchy.pdf],
whose detailed description is available in the documentation of the
[Czech Named Entity Corpus 1.1 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/cnec/cnec1.1].

: ``czech-cnec1.1-<version>.ner``
  Czech named entity recognizer trained on training portion of [CNEC 1.1 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/cnec/cnec1.1].

  The latest version ``czech-cnec1.1-140205.ner`` reaches 75.63% F1-measure on
  [CNEC 1.1 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/cnec/cnec1.1] etest data.  Model speed:
  ~35k words/s, model size: ~7MB.

: ``czech-cnec1.1-<version>-no_numbers.ner``
  Czech named entity recognizer trained on training portion of [CNEC 1.1 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/cnec/cnec1.1],
  except for the supertypes ``c`` (Bibliographic items), ``n`` (Number expressions) and
  ``q`` (Quantitative expressions), which are not included.

  The latest version ``czech-cnec1.1-140205-no_numbers.ner`` reaches 77.88%
  F1-measure on [CNEC 1.1 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/cnec/cnec1.1] etest data
  without ``c`` (Bibliographic items), ``n`` (Number expressions) and ``q``
  (Quantitative expressions) supertypes.  Model speed: ~40k words/s,
  model size: ~7MB.
