Czech NameTag Models
====================

%!encoding: utf-8

== Czech NameTag Models ==

Czech models are distributed under the
[CC BY-NC-SA http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/] licence.
They are trained on [Czech Named Entity Corpus http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/cnec/]
1.1 and 2.0 and internally use [MorphoDiTa http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/morphodita/]
as a tagger and lemmatizer. Czech models work in NameTag version 1.0 or later.

Czech models are versioned according to the date when released, the version
format is ``YYMMDD``, where ``YY``, ``MM`` and ``DD`` are two-digit
representation of year, month and day, respectively. The latest version is
140205.


=== Czech Named Entity Corpus 2.0 Model ===

The model is trained on the training portion of the
[Czech Named Entity Corpus 2.0 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/cnec/cnec2.0].
The corpus uses a
[detailed two-level named entity hierarchy http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/~strakova/cnec2.0/ne-type-hierarchy.pdf],
whose detailed description is available in the documentation of the
[Czech Named Entity Corpus 2.0 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/cnec/cnec2.0].
This hierarchy is an updated version of CNEC
1.1 hierarchy and is more suitable for automatic named entity recognition.

: ``czech-<version>-cnec2.0.ner``
  Czech named entity recognizer trained on training portion of [CNEC 2.0 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/cnec/cnec2.0].

  The latest version ``czech-140205-cnec2.0.ner`` reaches 75.42% F1-measure on
  [CNEC 2.0 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/cnec/cnec2.0] etest data.  Model speed:
  ~40k words/s, model size: ~8MB.

: ``czech-<version>-cnec2.0-no_numbers.ner``
  Czech named entity recognizer trained on training portion of [CNEC 2.0 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/cnec/cnec2.0],
  except for the supertype ``n`` (Number expressions), which is not included.

  The latest version ``czech-140205-cnec2.0-no_numbers.ner`` reaches 77.12%
  F1-measure on [CNEC 2.0 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/cnec/cnec2.0] etest data
  without ``n`` (Number expressions) supertype.  Model speed: ~45k words/s,
  model size: ~8MB.


=== Czech Named Entity Corpus 1.1 Model ===

The model is trained on the training portion of the
[Czech Named Entity Corpus 1.1 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/cnec/cnec1.1].
The corpus uses a
[detailed two-level named entity hierarchy http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/~strakova/cnec1.0/ne-type-hierarchy.pdf],
whose detailed description is available in the documentation of the
[Czech Named Entity Corpus 1.1 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/cnec/cnec1.1].

: ``czech-<version>-cnec1.1.ner``
  Czech named entity recognizer trained on training portion of [CNEC 1.1 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/cnec/cnec1.1].

  The latest version ``czech-140205-cnec1.1.ner`` reaches 75.63% F1-measure on
  [CNEC 1.1 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/cnec/cnec1.1] etest data.  Model speed:
  ~35k words/s, model size: ~7MB.

: ``czech-<version>-cnec1.1-no_numbers.ner``
  Czech named entity recognizer trained on training portion of [CNEC 1.1 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/cnec/cnec1.1],
  except for the supertypes ``c`` (Bibliographic items), ``n`` (Number expressions) and
  ``q`` (Quantitative expressions), which are not included.

  The latest version ``czech-140205-cnec1.1-no_numbers.ner`` reaches 77.56%
  F1-measure on [CNEC 1.1 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/cnec/cnec1.1] etest data
  without ``c`` (Bibliographic items), ``n`` (Number expressions) and ``q``
  (Quantitative expressions) supertypes.  Model speed: ~40k words/s,
  model size: ~7MB.
